Novel : Introduction a. Concept and Definition of Novel A novel is a story written in prose. People love to tell stories. It has been going on since ancient times. People used to tell stories by word of mouth There was no way to write it down. Later, the novel appeared in its continuation. But the novel is not just a story, it is a kind of creative work. Human life is the source of novels. Writers write novels by mixing their thoughts and imagination with the events that happen in this life. In the novel, we get the expression of the novelist's feelings. This is how the novel has become a kind of creative work. When people then learn to write, the novel appears. Storytellers became extinct after the advent of the printing press in the fifteenth century. The era of modern novel begins. First this modern novel started in Europe, then it spread all over the world. The writing of modern novels began.

As I said at the beginning, there is a main or main story in the novel. There may be more side stories to build this story. As a result, the novel is not usually short, nor is it strictly a short story. However, literary theorists could not agree on the size of the story, whether side stories will be used to develop the main story or not. E. According to M. Foster in his book Aspents of the Natale, the novel is “a prose story of definite volume” (0999 01 & 00581]) 6%:97). Talking about this volume, he said, the word count of the novel should be at least twenty five thousand. However, Foster did not say what the maximum number would be. A novel written by the famous French novelist Marcel Proust (0 99801) 0% [.050[1019) has twelve hundred thousand words. This is the greatest novel ever written in the world. The number of words in Leo Tolstoy's War and Peace is also high - like five hundred and eighty seven thousand. Italy's famous poet and novelist Umberto Ecko claimed that a text written in one sentence of seven words is the smallest novel in the world. Literary theorists could not agree not only on the form, but also on the nature or characteristics of the novel. How will the story be presented, what will be the theme of the story, what will be the style of language - literary theorists have chosen different ways to express their independence. However, despite these differences, it is not that there are no similarities in some respects. It is because of these common features that the novel has been established as a special type of creative work. For example, the story that the novelist constructs is constructed with the help of narration. Through prose and dialogue. This description of the novel is called 'narrative' (81180) in order to tell the story of the novel. The word 'novel' used in Bengali also has this format. “Sub, suffixed with 'nas'. This is the default format. The Sanskrit etymology of this word used in Bengali is as follows: up+ni+as+a _ novel. It has two synonyms in English: Novel Fiction Wea "ait aoe from Suita novella. Meaning: 419 (story) or story. Source of fiction is 0 ghetna) or story. 2 Some Definitions of Bengali Textbook Novel It is not very easy to define novel as a special form of literature. There are differences of opinion about its size and nature. As a result, it is difficult to give a precise definition. However, the definitions of the novel based on some of its general characteristics are as follows: The writer's personal life-philosophy and life feeling are shaped into a descriptive work of art based on a real story, called a novel. ['Upanyas'' Sahitya-Sandarsani, Srishchandra Das, Kathakali, Dhaka, 1976.] 'Novel' in English is a special type of literary form. A long narrative literary work written in prose. [Novels', Sahitya Shabarthakosh, Suravi Bandyopadhyay, West Bengal Bangla Academy, Calcutta, 1999, p. 29.] An invented prose narrative of considerable length and a certain complexity that deals imaginatively with human experience, usually through a connected sequence of events involving a group of persons in a specific setting, is called a novel. [The Britannica Guide to Literary Elements: Prose Literary Terms and Concepts, Ed. by Kathleen Kuiper, Britannica Educational Publishing, New York, 2012, p. 1.] The term “novel” is now applied to a great variety of writings that have in common only the attribute of being extended works of fiction written in prose. ['Novel', A Glossary of Literary Terms (9th Edition), M. H. Abrams and Geoffrey Galt Harpham, Wadsworth Cengage Learning, Boston, 2009, p. 226.] If we review the history of literature, it will be seen that the novel is a relatively modern creation. As the first form of literature, poetry, epic, narrative poetry were created. Later, as people's lives became more complex, novels appeared. Writers take refuge in stories from the urge to talk about themselves, the people around them, and the society. He started writing novels. In the novel, we see the expression of the author's philosophy and sense of life. The totality of life is reflected in the novel. This is the essence of the novel. The poets have reached this sense of modern times from the seventeenth century Spanish novelist Sargentas's Don Quixote. b. Aspect and structure of the novel How the story of the novel will be developed is the aspect of the aspect and structure of the novel. For about four hundred years, through various practices, in general, the novel is based on the following elements: 1. Story or plot (plot) 2. Character (character) 3. Scene/Environment (scene or setting) 4. Narrative method, 5. Language (diction) and 6. Author's philosophy.

The main element of a novel is its plot or story. This story can be simple or complex. As can be seen in experimental novels, the story is not so dominant. Language or manner of speaking becomes important. Absurd novels or French nouveau novels are written in this way. But generally, the story of the novel is built up with the help of some small stories or sub-stories. The story presented in the novel is called the plot or the plot. The second element of the novel is character. The novel is developed through the actions and reactions of the characters. A novel has one or more characters. Which one will be the main character, or whether there will be a main character at all, is up to the novelist. The story of the novel progresses through the events that the characters take place. The story of the novel also develops through the development of the characters. The novel moves towards a conclusion. The novel is the story of this evolving character from beginning to end.

Another element of the novel is its various scenes or environments. The novelist weaves the story of the novel by combining different pieces of scenes or environments. This environment is developed depending on the character's attitude and behavior dynamics. Narrative is another element of the novel. The scene, environment or story that we find in the novel is constructed with the help of various gestures. Sometimes the character tells his own story in his own language, sometimes the novelist narrates the story of the novel. Sometimes there is only information, sometimes the novelist builds the structure of the story in emotional poetic language. From that point of view, language is the most important element of the novel. Because novels are written through language. Everything is described through language. A special atmosphere is created. If the right language is not used in the right place, it does not become a novel. However, everything in the novel is controlled by the author's philosophy of life. What the author says is his philosophy. Finally we see this philosophy reflected in the story of a novel. Generally speaking, the novel is written by combining all the mentioned elements.

c. Brief Introduction of Bengali Novels: As mentioned earlier, novels are a creation of modern times. Bengali literature started writing novels on the lines of English novels only one and a half hundred years ago. But many have found its seeds in ancient Sanskrit stories-poems, Panchatantra and Buddhist Jataka stories, medieval fairy tales, Mymensingh hymns, romantic stories-poems, Nath literature, Mangalkavya, Arabic novels, folktales etc. Looking at it this way, no sign of Bengali novels can be found before modern times. But with the onset of British rule, massive urbanization centered on Calcutta on the one hand, and a middle class emerged on the other. Humanism, individualism, spread of education and periodicals, social awareness etc. were increased due to the influence of European education. Society becomes increasingly complex with people of various classes and professions. The people of the new age began to feel the roar of the new society. This is the effect of the novel.

Many believe that Hanna Catherine Mullens's (1862-61) Full Money and Karuna Bechara (1952) is the first novel in Bengali literature. Some have again found signs of the novel in Parichand Mitra's Alal House Dulal. But everyone has accepted that Bankimchandra Chattopadhyay's (1838-94) Durgesh Nandini (1865) is the first meaningful novel in Bengali literature. Bankimchandra is actually the creator of the modern Bengali novel. All the signs of the novel can be seen in his novels. He wrote historical novels. Wrote social novels. Various inconsistencies of the society, desires, desires, pains and conflicts of the individual are beautifully revealed in his novel. He has also shown success in story telling, characterization, language etc. His notable novels are Kapalkundala, Bishvriksha, Will of Krishnakanta etc.

Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941) is another famous writer of Bengali novels. He was multi-talented. His success in writing novels is also enviable. Rabindranath wrote his novels with a wonderful combination of the mind and the mind of the individual. In Bankim's novel, we have seen that the individual could not establish himself under the pressure of society. His chatris suffered endless suffering. On the other hand, Rabindranath's novel found men and women of the new era. Initiated by humanity, they are denying social reforms. Seeking to achieve self-reliance on the basis of equal rights of men and women. Motivated by patriotism, the end of colonial rule is sought. Rabindranath's novels are notable in terms of story construction, character portrayal, language analysis, era reflection, psychoanalysis etc. The most popular novels written by him are Eksh Bali, Gora, Ghare Baire, Four Chapters and Communication. After Rabindranath, Saratchandra Chattopadhyay (1876-1938) wrote novels based on Bengali homesickness and prevailing family emotions. He gained enviable popularity. His notable novels are Characterless, Grihadah, Devdas, Dena-Paona, Srikanta etc.

Three Bandyopadhyays - Tarashankar Bandyopadhyay (1898-1971), Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay (1894-1950) and Manik Bandyopadhyay - appeared in the world of Bengali novels. The natural sweetness of Abhaman Bengal, the gentle calm of the countryside, the forests, the mountains that still control our lives, can be understood by reading his novels Pather Panchali, Aparajita, Aranyak etc. In Tara Shankar's novel, I find stories of landlords who have lost their past glory and wealth, and ordinary people of various occupations of the lower classes. These people are our well-known Vaishnavis, Kabials, Yatra artists, potters, Bede, Sapude, Bazikar, dancers of Jhumur team etc. Pictures of the life of rising industrialists and workers can also be found in his novels. His notable novels are Ganadevta, Panchagrama, Dhatridevta, Tales of Laughing Bend, Kavi etc. Two main features of Manik Banerjee's novel are: (1) the conflict between the rich and the poor in the background of Marxism and (2) the complex relationship between men and women in the light of Freudian psychoanalysis. The picture of people's lives plagued by colonial rule is vivid in his novels. Along with that, the image of rural reality will be found. Kavya of Dibaratri, Majhi of Padmanadi, Itikatha of Puppet Dance, Samaka, Shaburatali etc. are his famous novels. Jagadish Gupta, Satinath Bhaduri, Kamalkumar Majumdar, Debesh Roy, Mahasweta Devi, Sunil Gangopadhyay, Tishrendu Mukhopadhyay and others are notable among those who have become famous by writing Bengali novels.

d. Brief Introduction to Bangladesh Novel: In 1947, India was politically divided. A new socio-political situation began in East Bengal. It was at this time that the novel of Bangladesh began its journey. The region was a colony of Pakistan until Bangladesh became independent in 1971. Although civic life emerged centered on Dhaka, rural life remained the same. Rich-poor conflicts, rural superstitions, poverty, etc., threatened people's lives. Bangladesh gained independence in 1971. A new impetus appeared in the national life. Just as the touch of modernity was felt in the public life, so was the pull of the rural life. Bangladeshi novelists have written various novels in this background. Bangladeshi novels can be categorized as follows:

(1) Novels written in rural background: Syed Waliullah's Lalsalu, Crying Nadi Crying, Chander Ambasya, Abu Ishaq's Surya-Dighal Bari, Zaheer Raihan's Thousand Years, Abdul Gaffar Chowdhury's Tale of Chandradwip, Shaukat Osman's Janani, Akhtaruzzaman Ilyas's Khoabnama, Hasan Azizul Haque's Agunpakhi, Syed Shamsul Paran Master in Haque's space, Selina Hussain's Deepanvita etc. (2) Novels written in urban and rural background: Alauddin Al Azad's Hungry and Hope, Shahidullah Qaiser's Compiler, Sardar Zain Uddin's Hope of Many Suns, Abul Fazl's Rangaprabhat, Anwar Pasha's Nest Finder, etc. (3) Novels written in the background of urban life: Abul Fazl's Jeevan Pather Yatri, Rashid Karim's Uttam Purush and Prem Ek Lal Rose, New Day in Front of Abu Rushd, Akhtaruzzaman Ilyas' Chilekothar Sepai, Shaukat Ali's Dakshinayan Day etc. Shamsuddin Abul Kalam's Kashban's Daughter, Abu Ishaq's Padma Poli Sardar Zainuddin's Pannamati, Shaukat Ali's Pradosh Prakritjan, Selina Hussain's House of Insects, etc. (5) Psychology and Philosophical Novels: Alauddin Al Azad's Twenty-Three Oil Paintings, Syed Shamsul Haque's Country of Walls and Pictures of a Woman, Shaukat Ali's Pingal Akash, Mahmudul Haque's Khelaghar etc. (6) Historical and Liberation War-based novels: Abu Jafar Shamsuddin's Bhawal Garh Upakhan and Padma Meghna Jamuna, Shamsuddin Abul Kalam's Alam Garh Tale, Satyen Sen's Abshapt Nagari, Anwar Pasha's Rifle Roti Awrat, Shaukat Osman's Jalangi, Rizia Rahman's Bong from Bangla, Mahmudul Haque's Jiban My Sister, Hasan Azizul Haque's Widow's Tale, Selina Hussain's Hangar Nadi Grenade and Gayatri Sandhya etc. In addition to this division, the novelists of Bangladesh have written novels based on various topics according to age. As a result, they wrote novels for adults as well as for children. All in all, it can be said that the novel of Bangladesh has developed in a different way. Rural people's life and urban life, personal struggle and ethnic struggle, history and politics - everything has a place in the novels of Bangladesh. The novelists of Bangladesh have shown success in various aspects such as characterisation, language, narrative style etc.


e. Kakatarua Novel and Novelist Introduction: Selina Hossain: Selina Hossain was born on June 14, 1947 in Rajshahi. His father's name is Mosharraf Hossain, mother's name is Mariamnesa Bakul. He is the fourth child of his parents. Began writing while studying at Rajshahi University in the 1960s. So far, he has published thirty-three novels for adults and twenty-five for children. The world of Selina Hossain's writing is the people of Bangladesh, its culture and traditions. His novel reflects the totality of contemporary social and political conflict-crisis. Bengali pride language-movement and the context of liberation war gained new dimension in his writings. Several of his stories and novels have been translated into several languages ​​including English, Bush, French, Hindi, Japanese, Korean, Finnish, Urdu, Arabic, Malay, Malayalam etc. His novels have been included in the syllabus of several foreign universities. His notable novels are: Hangar Nadi Grenade, Pakamakart Gharvasati, Neel Moyer Jauvan, Gayatri Sandhya, Purnachabir Magnata, Yamuna Nadi Mushayera, Bhumi and Kusum. Ekushey Padak, Bangla Academy Literary Award and received all major awards of the country. As an international recognition, Surma Chowdhury received the International Memorial Award (India). In 2010 Rabindra Bharati University, Calcutta awarded him the honorary title of Delet. During his career he was the director of Bangla Academy. Now writing full time, working on women development and human rights.

Discussion of the novel: Kakatarua: a village in Bangladesh. A young Budha of this village. The three clans have no one to call their own except for one aunt and cousin Kunti. But even if not today, there was a day. That was a couple of years ago. Apart from parents there were two sisters and one brother. The youngest sister Binu was one and a half years old. There was a brother Taleb and a sister Shilu. His days were well spent with these brothers and sisters. But it all ended overnight. All died of cholera. Fortunately Budha survived. Aunt's house was the first shelter. But when poverty was raised, Budha left that house. Since then Budha is alone. Spend the night wherever you want. Do whatever you want. When he gives up what he can.

The whole village and the bazaar became his haunt. All the people he knew became his own. This is how the day goes, the day comes. But one day the military entered the village. Burned the shops in the market. Surprised Budha, why did the military do this? What crime did the people of Bangladesh? He was very angry. Thought it needed to be remedied. Revenge is needed. It was not difficult for him to understand that the war of liberation had begun. But he does not understand what the liberation war is. But it understood, those military are foreigners. Not the people of Bangladesh. It is important to fight against them. Not only these, but those who are helping them, must be fought against. He will not run away from the village like others. But he is very small, how to fight?

One night freedom fighters Ali and Mithu came to the village in the dark of night. Budha was told to blow up the military camp of the school. Budha got involved in the liberation war. First, the house of Ahad Munsi, chairman of the peace committee, was burnt. Then Razakar set the commander's house on fire. No one suspected him as a parentless teenager. Then came that day. Shilpi Shahabuddin, the leader of the freedom fighters, gave him the task of blowing up the camp to get mines. While digging the bunker, he came to the bank of the river to plant a mine in it. Shahabuddin and his comrades were waiting here. That moment has come. As soon as the Pakistani soldiers entered the bunker, the entire camp was blown up by a mine explosion. Sitting on a boat in the river, Shahabuddin, Budha heard that sound. Their campaign was successful. The boat moved to a safe distance. In short, this is the story of Kakatarua novel. The story of a brave teenage freedom fighter.

We do not find it difficult to understand, the novel is written in the background of the liberation war of 1971. Selina Hossain has developed its narrative or plot excellently. The beginning is like this: Daylight at night, darkness at sunset. Both are equal to him. Walks around the market. He does not keep track of where he goes. East-west, north-south are all equal to him. He thinks that wherever his eyes go, the road is open for him.

This is the story of Budha, the main character of Kaktaduya novel. After that Selina Hossain gradually developed the character of Budha. Although Budha is a teenager, he possesses infinite courage and human qualities. Compassion for the people of the country, hatred for foreign militaries, patriotism are the main features of his character. His behavior seems very normal. He gradually became a freedom fighter because he loved the country. All in all, this is an excellent story of patriotism. The novelist has developed his characters, especially the character of Buddha, with this aim in mind.

Budha is the main character of Kaktaduya novel. Its story is built around Budha. He is young but very brave. He never heard horror stories as a child. He does not know what fear is. He no longer fears when he thinks of his parents, brothers and sisters dying. Villagers call him crazy but he is actually a 'brave boy'. As he grew up alone, he became bolder. After leaving the aunt's house, he felt a sense of liberation. Living alone, he grows up as an independent person. The novelist has thus developed him as a fearless teenager. After that he got involved in the liberation war. The peace committee and the Razaka commander's house were set on fire. Mines are left in camp bunkers. not afraid Selina Hossain beautifully portrays Budha's growing up as a brave and then getting involved in the liberation war in this novel. This development of Budha's character therefore seems quite natural. The fact that he got involved in the liberation war as a teenager has thus become logical.

We find several other characters in Kakatarua novel. They did not play a very big role. But it helped to build the story of the novel. These characters are Kunti, Nolak Bua, Harikaku, Ahad Munsi, Ali, Mithu, Phulkali, Razakar Quddus and freedom fighter Shilpi Shahabuddin. Apart from these characters, the influence of another person is evident in this novel. That man is Bangabandhu. Many times when Budha thought about the liberation war, his call for freedom like a shadow ignited Budha. Selina Hossain had to take the help of these characters to create the entire novel. He makes the story believable to the reader.

The novel's language, setting and narration are also very interesting. Novelist Selina Hossain has embedded the story of the novel in small sentences from the beginning. The narrative that Buddha has resorted to to explain that he is a free man is also surprising. Some of the relevant passages are: (a) path ok ke-ay. He smiled and said, here I am. look at me The path sees him. (b) What happened if there is no place to sleep? Shops have balconies, trees, market stalls, boats moored at the ghat. (c) What happened if there is no rice at all times? There are fruits, river water. Nolock bua muridi is fried. The description suggests that Budha is an independent teenager growing up in his own right. Military brutality

The description of the carnage and the scene of brutality he witnessed is equally compelling: s. Salam uncle fell face down. shot Ravida fell. shot Many fall together. He cannot sit under the cover of a paddy tree. His body trembled. Thousands of balls flew around his ears. He falls. His body becomes covered in mud. And when Budha thinks of taking revenge against the military, the description goes like this: He looks at the unblinking soldiers. thinking Very thoughtful and serious. I think, one day they will have to leave this village. One day they will return the same way they came. They have to go. But should they be allowed to return to life? After reaching here, novelist Selina Hossain talks about taking 'revenge' through Budha. This is the author's philosophy. The idea of ​​standing up against the tyrant and taking revenge is revealed in this novel. Not only adults, even a teenager can participate in the liberation war, this is the story. The story of the freedom struggle of a neglected, marginalized teenager in the village. Those of the new generation who have not seen the liberation war, will get some idea about the liberation war by reading this novel. The merit of the novel lies here.

Kakatarua (Selina Hussain): Day light at night, darkness at sundown. Both are equal to him. Walks around the market. He does not keep track of where he goes. East-west, north-south are all equal to him. He thinks that wherever his eyes go, the road is open for him. Path calls him - come. He smiled and said, here I am. look at me The path sees him. Fields see him. He rubs the dust of the road with his two feet in the joy of his heart. What is his joy, what is his cry, no one can understand. He understands a lot. His gaze ran over everyone's head. He looked and said, look at me. Everyone sees him. No one gets tired of seeing him. He is like that. He has no problem in living this day.

There is no place to sleep, what happened? Shops have balconies; There are trees, market stalls, boats moored at the ghat. You can literally sleep inside the boat. And if you don't get any of those things, there is a terrace in the Gerst house. There are sheds without doors. You can crawl in and lie down. There is a pile of hay in Gerst's yard. No one can see if you lie on straw. Many nights when he wakes up, he sees the starry sky above his head. While lying on his side, Nedi felt that the dog was lying next to him with his body buried in the straw. Seeing him moving, he gently licked her. He likes it. He fell into a deep sleep again. This is how he spends the night. He has no problem with the night. There is no rice at all times, what happened? There are fruits, river water. Nolock bua muridi is fried. If you work in a tea shop, you will get tea and biscuits. It can cover the night by eating that. Apart from that, sometimes small jobs are called for in Gerst's house. Then the rice is mixed with the arahar dal. Otherwise, someone gives a salt-panta. A little broth is available with rice flour bread in someone's house. At the wedding, they get rice and meat in Petpur. His day is over. He is not upset about this.

He is not afraid. Fear does not overcome him. In fact, he does not know what fear is. He never heard ghost stories as a child. No one scared him of poker. He grew up in his own way. A boy who grows up in his own way does not face fear. Fear stays hidden. So the boy can look around with open eyes. He does not have to close his eyes in any fear. He has a lot of courage.

If someone asks, where are you going, Budha? In the golden room. what is that He turned his hand and stepped forward. No one answers that question. He who has no house is surrounded by houses of gold. What does it say? Sometimes people ask such stupid questions, it makes him smile. Laughingly tells himself, there is no limit to human stupidity. He walks on the road to and fro. sings The song makes the chest empty. He likes music very much. He also learns music by listening to Akhara music. He can sing once he hears it. He thinks that one who has music in him can do many things. He is a good person. He sat on the side of the road thinking about this. A dead snail shell lies at his feet. He picked it up on his thumb and started dancing. Dancing and lying down on the grass. His feet are raised towards the sky. He hides the sun with his hands. By the way, such fun games do not happen anymore. He saw through the gap of his hand that the shell of the snail felt like a hat on his thumb. iron cap If the thumb is a person, then the shell is another kind of hat on the human head. Man is made to fight. The boy fills his surroundings with such thoughts. His day goes like this. Some eat kamala khat, some graze cows, some are whole boys. Catch fish in a boat. Shopping at the grocery store. Makes tea in a tea shop. Takes a cup of tea in front of the customer. Dhankhete Nirani. How much more! There is no end to his work. Village people say, he is not crazy. has hardened Solidification is called. Seeing parents, four brothers and sisters die in front of the eyes, is anyone soft? Or can there be? His life is no longer normal. There is no way to move. The vulture eats in the college. He thinks of grief as a violent vulture. When he thinks about this, he hears the flapping of the vulture's wings inside his brain. The sound of a vulture's hard beak. A terrible crooked night wakes up in front of him.

What kind of darkness was that night! silent village Sometimes the dog cries. It seems as if someone is weaving with those words. The braid of that word twists around the chest. When suddenly there is a cry in a house, he thinks that the sky is bursting and a severe thunder is happening one after another. His father's body started twisting inside the room. The eyeball is fixed by twisting. Only one cup in the house. Running out of oil. There is no kerosene in the house so a little more oil can be added to the flask. He could not even think about putting oil in the bottle, going to the aunt in the next room and fetching oil. There was no time for these thoughts. He sees mother lying on one side. Small tinu on his chest. Tinu is one and a half years old. A lean, pack-like body. It is not known whether he is alive or not. He shivered with his hands on Tinu. The body is cold. His chest heaved. Tinu loved to climb on his lap. When he saw him, he raised his hands and made a sound. He would take her on his chest and go down to the yard. He used to sing to sleep. Tinu used to sleep with his head on her shoulder. What will he do now? Will you sing a song for Tinu? Tinu will wake up after listening to music? Reach out to her lap? The boy's chest was empty. Sees Shilu and Taleb rolling on the floor on the other side of the room. His two younger ones. Both of them are pithapithi. The boy used to play sports and walk around with them. Sometimes there was a quarrel over the sharing of fruits. His chest bursts when he thinks about how many days he has given two or four blows to both of them. Before he knew it, he saw the two younger siblings hugging each other. Then it's over. Binu also leaves before nightfall. Only a few hours, but the sky-rocketing time of his life. Binu is his half sister. So many memories with her. How to forget so much? That Binu is no more. Binuta's eyes are closed. Those eyes will never open again. Binu's eyes were wonderful. As if a whole bill is in his eyes. When Binu smiled, it felt like waves were flowing in Bill's water. The whole house stood still in front of him.

Once the night falls. In the morning, after seeing the cold lifeless bodies with hands, everything has frozen and hardened. He understands that freezing means death. He can't cry. Can't beat myself up. He began to feel his feet starting to harden. That feeling gradually rises upwards. Feet first. Then the knees, thighs, waist, stomach, chest, back, throat, nose, eyes, forehead and hair became stiff. He saw death with stone eyes. Half of the people of the village perished in the cholera epidemic. Sometimes I look at myself and ask myself, how did I survive? When he remembers that death and dark night he has no more fear. Can't understand why village people call him crazy, actually he has become a brave boy.

He stood in the middle of the field, straightened his hands on both sides, tied his clothes on his head and stood in the posture of a crow. He sees the words flying past the ears. A wave of sound rises up and disappears in the air in a moment. He thinks that it is not the call of Bolta, but the voice of his aunt. Chachi told him to eat pantabhat after burning chilies in the morning, he only ate rice every day. The pretense was not less. Can't earn, Bapu? Earn! He moves with the sound while eating the rice. The sound rattles the hardened brain. Your parents are dead. Now I'm angry. I can't carry the burden of the next son, Bapu. Understanding! The sound bounced like a ball against the ground in his tight chest. He started thinking. Listen Budha, you can see that your uncle has no income. Eight cousins ​​of yours, days don't last. He eats rice in silence. The burnt chillies turned the rice red. Surprisingly, the flame did not burn his tongue. What a strange taste the red lump of rice is going down the throat. Just wants to bring tears to her eyes. But that water is also blocked. doesn't make

Chachi says in a tone of bullying, what the hell are you talking about? i will earn Chachi's eyes light up. Really earn? I will carry my own burden. Really? So you will release me? Yes, true.
Liberation! Hearing the word, he stumbles. When the rice gets stuck in the throat, he coughs loudly. Chachi handed him a glass of water. Drink water, Bapu. Why so little that your eyes turn red. You were a very happy boy in your childhood. Mother's take. How did you become after the people died one night! Your eyes turn red if something happens. Does my eye really get red? Yes, indeed. I'm not kidding. I thought my eyes had turned to stone. I can't see anything, aunty. No, I can't tell you how red he is. I want to greet you when I see you. I think you are my mentor. Either my father or uncle. Why do you shame me aunty? I don't want to embarrass you. What can I do that - her aunt can't finish. Wipe your eyes. Then sat at the kitchen door humming and crying. The boy does not hear his aunt's cry. He doesn't care about that. The boy was very happy to hear his aunt's words. It seems that it is flying to make a sound like that chatter itself. He finished the rest of the rice slowly. It is understood that he has no fear. How many times will he discover himself? How many times will you look at yourself and understand that he is not afraid? Today is his very happy day. Thinking about the red eyes, he came out of the house one day. He never returned to live in that house. Went to meet aunt. Sometimes he went to share fruits with his younger siblings. Sitting on the balcony, the duo chatted. Chachi wiped the sweat from her face with a rag. The sisters gave water. Gave molasses. He sometimes ate, never ate. Kunti's eyes used to sparkle when she only thought that he was gone. He didn't say a word. He used to sit quietly. Apalak used to stare. He would feel heavy when he went to that house. He didn't want to burden her heaving chest any more.

On the day he came out of his aunt's house for once, he thought that breaking the relationship meant liberation? Can relationships be broken? The boy doesn't get an answer. Don't understand what the relationship is? If the father dies, what happens after the aunt? But cousin little Kunti stood in front of him with the right of relationship. After coming out of the house that day, she followed him crying. Said, you don't go, Budha bhai. He looks back at Kunti's words. Hearing Kunti's tearful voice, the red glow disappeared from her eyes. He realizes that there is a wound in his chest. Bleeding from the wound. Wonder what the relationship is like? Would it have suffered if it was someone else instead of Kunti? Kunti held his hand and said, "Don't go, Budha Bhai." won't go Yes, don't go. Why? I will be very sad if you leave. feel bad? Why? Kunti's voice changed in an instant. He thinks this voice is a new discovery for him. He patted Kusti's head and said, "Let's go today." I will come one day. When will it come? I will stay in the village. I will come when I want. What did it come to? Didn't it come? No, not a bit better. I don't know what is good, Kunti. Then happily says, ok I will come very well one day. When? Kunti's eyes lit up with happiness. When will Budha come brother? time for your wedding
Marriage? I will not marry. The elder brother is not married. Who will marry me? will do I will see that the bridegroom will come in a red dress. like you 'Damn fool! Why be like me? Am I a boy? I am now a street boy. an orphan You will get a very beautiful, very good groom. Kunti's eyes welled up with tears. She cries and says, no one is as good as you. Budha says, I will go, Kunti. you go home Chachi will scold you if she sees you. I don't want you to be fooled for me. Kunti stands in the middle of the path and screams. The boy does not look back. He starts to think that Kunti is shouting that no one is as good as you. He doesn't understand. If he is so good, then why aunt could not tolerate him? If so, is the relationship good for someone, bad for someone? Thinking and standing in the middle of the field like a crow. It's his game. Standing in such a posture, he wants to get people's affection. He wants to grow while playing this game. When he saw that standing in the sun, the shadow of a vulture fell on his head. Seeing him, the vulture thinks that he is a dead man. It flies from the top of the palm tree. In fact, you can see most of the people inside Kakatarua and in the village. They are so cocky. out of order Pathaghat, Hatbazar. no home No full stomach rice. Only a few people in the village are like vultures. The crow is afraid of them.

The people of the village named him Kakatarua. Nolock Bua called out. When Harikaku caught a lot of fish in his net, Phokla looked at him and said with a cheeky smile, Manikartan. Joynal uncle does not talk to him except father while harvesting ripe paddy. Says Sonababa. On the market day, on the way home from Dalavra Bazaar, Hashem Mia says, O Khokonbabu, today you will eat rice at my house. The man would have lost his soul if he had bargained more. The dung-collecting old lady of the village called him Gobarraja. For a long time, the old woman has collected dung. He has many names. He is very happy with it. He thinks it's good. Let him call me by whatever name he likes. If one has many different names, there can be many different people within those names. He wants to be a lot of people. Why? Like, as good as Kunti thinks. Nolock is as bold as Buar's thoughts. A red-eyed person like aunty said. A word, strong, was written in the wonder of Harikaku's eyes as he pulled up the full fish net. What else? Believing? yes Philanthropy? yes Kind hearted? yes Friendly? yes what else Everything, everything. He ran to think. He started running across the field, across the ghat, across the river. The field of Tepantar, Pankhiraj horse, seven seas and thirteen rivers floated in his imagination. This is how he spends his day. He became grateful to his aunt. Bhave, aunt gave him the dream of becoming a free man by speaking of liberation. What fun free people, free people. When he came to the market to say that he was a free man, the shopkeeper raised his eyebrows and asked, "What are you talking about, Budha?" freedom Independence? Far fool The boy bowed his neck and said, freedom is a great joy. Freedom is very necessary. I am now a free man. The shopkeeper asked him to concentrate on his work, the boy's madness did not go away. One day while playing with cockatoos, he saw that the military had come to the village. He already heard that there was a war in the country. The military is burning down towns and villages. But he had no idea about the military. How will it stay? Before this, the military never came to the village. The police came. He was not afraid of the police. On the other hand, when the police arrested the village thief, many children followed them to the police station. He was enjoying the service as he went on a rampage. But this time the military comes in a jeep. to shoot. The sound of boots was like a crunching noise. It is as if the ground where the foot falls is bursting and boiling. He stood far away and looked surprised. They got down from the military jeep in the middle of the big road. He saw them running towards the market. He lies tall behind the paddy tree. Raised his head after a while. Where did the people go? Then came the cry. After a while the market stalls started burning. He got into the mud of the paddy field in fear. Surprise! He realizes that many things are going through his head very quickly. When the military left, he ran and stood in front of the market. Some died either by fire or by bullets. Many did not die, but were injured. Those who survived are running around trying to put out the fire. He himself fetches water from the sink with an earthen pot. His anger increased as he fetched water. He kept blowing in his mind. The thought of revenge made a deep sound in his chest. Once the fire went out, his eyes turned red looking at the half-burnt market. One said to him, what happened, Budha? nothing Your eyes are red from the smoke of the fire. Nothing happened to me. come with me stay at my house no I will be in this market. I can sleep under the roof of a half-burnt house. The man frowned and said, "You are not human." Saying I will not be a man, I will not be a man, I will not be a man, and he runs again. When something grew inside his chest, he went and stood by the river. He listens to the sound of the river. If he stares at the water, his vision freezes.

The next day, many people of the village started fleeing from their homes. He first ran to Nolock Bua. When you go, the eyes are sore. Blockage of Nolock Buoy is over. Where did he go to fry his clothes! The khangra stick rhymes in the yard. The earthen pot is overturned and broken. Tins of clothes are hanging in the room. Nolock Bua hugged him before leaving. Come with me. Where? Wherever the eyes go. A shelter will be found somewhere. But why go? Nolock Bua looked surprised. His fat body does not move. Says in great surprise, now is the time to ask? Are you asking that? Did not see what happened? They will come again. Then he will kill whoever he finds. None of us will survive.  Who will be in the village if everyone goes? Listen to the boy! Is there time to talk so much? Tell me what happened to you? Parents, siblings are all gone. Do you now have a hobby to go on your own?

He does not talk to Nolock Bua. Nolock Bua did not answer her words. Nolock Bua gets busy with work. He came out quietly. He knows that if there is no one, he will be alone. Why run away? He who flees is a coward. stupid Everyone should fight from the village. The fight started talking and walking. Many are on the way. He can't talk to everyone. Because, they don't get time to look at him. They are busy with themselves. They are running away in fear. Meet Harikaku under the big jujube tree. Cahill is the burden of poor baggage. He is very fond of Harikaku. How long has Kakima been ill? Can't walk properly. Kakima saw him and cried. Look Manikaran, can anyone leave the house at this age? Don't cry, Kaki. run away You have to live. You can't fight. Why only die in their hands? Give me your load, Kaku. Let me lead you a little further. Why forward? Manikaratan, you come with me. I don't want to leave you in the village. Why should I go with you? Who will be in the village? Who will see in your house? Let me take you a step further. It's getting late. As the day progresses, you will suffer from the sun. I want you not to suffer. Harikaku walks upright with a load on his head. Come to the side of the big road and say, now you go. now i can Will I meet you when I come back, Manikartan? It will be, it will be. Why do you think? The boy sees Harikaku leaving. How old is the dog? Can you walk? Or will be dead by the wayside? Then who will call him Manikartan? His eyes got wet. On the way back he met the queen. Their whole family is leaving. Rani says in a scared voice, I am going, Kakatarua. Which, see you when you come back. go right Don't be afraid. But you don't play cocky game anymore. The military can shoot. Don't be naughty, crow. I am very afraid of you. Who knows what you will do! You don't have to think about me so much. you go your way You are a coward. That's why you're running away. i won't run away i will fight Will you fight? Yes, fight, fight. which, which share. Rani said with surprise in both eyes, Is how brave, like a hero! Will you fight? Throwing that day, how much! He walked away smiling without speaking. Where will he go? Uncle went to the city to find work six months ago. did not return Chachi is not in the village now. He went to his father's house with his children. He gets these news through people. Chachi does not keep track of him. He gets news only if he takes news himself. In that house, Kunti is the only one who takes care of him. Sometimes he eats moa-murki. That's it. Of course, he does not have a headache about it. Slowly the days of village people become easier. Two months have passed since the military attack. Many of those who fled here and there have returned one by one. I hear many people have gone to India. He does not know where India is. No need to know. I remember Nolock Bua very much. Who knows where it went! There is no news from Harikaku either. There is no news of those who want to know. Those who are not his are all over the village. Her aunt is also back. But did not meet him. He did not go to that house. Only saw Kunti grow up from a distance. He looks different now.

Meanwhile, the military came to the village again. Make camp. Some of them guard the camp. He stood in front of the camp with a rifle and saw them. He had never seen such a person before. Where did they come from? Where is their country? Are they the people of this country? They do not even understand the language they speak. No one understands the village people well. What the two of them say in broken language. He feels even weirder to hear that language. If they are people of this country, why can't they understand their language? He cannot think for himself. How weird. The ball flew out of nowhere and landed on his head. The buzzing sound entered his ears. As if the bamboo is bursting with the sound of rustling, the market is burning. The scene of that day became fair in front of his eyes. After that day, he did not see that scene unfolding in his mind. Seeing a soldier standing in front of the camp today brought back the scene in his mind. shot Salam uncle fell face down. shot Ravida fell. shot Many fall together. He cannot sit under the cover of a paddy tree. His body trembled. Thousands of balls flew around his ears. He falls. His body becomes covered in mud. He sat up again. Mofiz, Shafi, Moti, Azahar Bhai, Madan Kaku, Sharif Chacha and many others fell. He did not forget anyone's name. Remember everyone's name. The face is embedded in the chest. He buried the body with everyone else in the village that afternoon when the military left after an apocalypse. Bamboo is cut from bamboo trees. Boiled water with plum leaves. The funeral took place. This is the first time he has seen a burial without a shroud. And many people saw a grave together. He wanted to say again and again, don't bury like that. Bury everyone separately. But could not say. Only Habib Bhai said crying, did we ever think that there will be a mass grave in this village? He himself asked while crying, what is a mass grave, Habib brother? Here's to stacking them all together. Pile up! He took the word in with great difficulty. Then muttered, revenge! It may be that he is suffering because of this experience. His inner speech became sharp. He stared at the unblinking soldiers. thinking Very thoughtful and serious. I think, one day they will have to leave this village. One day they will return the same way they came. They have to go. But should they be allowed to return to life? Once a cholera epidemic caused death in this village. This time different types of people have started to cause death. The cholera was gone after seven days. Will they go or chase? He could not even touch cholera. But those people can be touched. Their hands-feet-head-chest-back can be touched. He was also young when cholera came. Now he has grown up. There is stress on the body. have courage have intelligence But why leave? He realizes that her eyes turn red. If the eyes are red, the desire to do something inside him becomes a promise. He returns to the market. By the way, don't run away anywhere. If necessary, they will curl up like foxes under these burnt houses. He removed the ashes and coal and placed them under the house. Sweeps and cleans. It's pretty cool. He folded his torn kantha and put it in one place. Spread the mat on the floor. This burnt house looks good. He lies down and spreads his hands. By the way, he is now the crow of the crematorium. This is how he whistles. He sleeps by whistling. He fell asleep. In the dream, he feels a wave of joy flowing inside his chest.

Many nights sometimes the sound of gunshots wakes him up. Did they kill someone? Who is this night? Which mother's chest was empty? He muttered, "You who burn our houses, burn the market, kill people, make mass graves in villages, leave people from their homes, will you leave like this?" Don't you owe a punch? Are we so weak? Cholera could not eat me. I live for you. You will owe me something. Well, look, I'll give you something. He looks at the starry sky through the hole in the roof. But did Bangabandhu talk about fighting against these people? Yes, those are the stars. He got it right. You don't have to ask anyone to know this. Bangabandhu's Seventh March speech and Kanu Dayal's house listened to it on the radio. After hearing that blood-warming speech, he said to Madhu, from now on you will call me Bangabandhu. How much is this hobby! The monkey wants to go to the moon again.  Am I a monkey? Yes, monkeys. You are a hundred times monkey. Madhu giggled. That honey is gone. Burned by fire. He did not recognize any of Madhu's bodies. Madhur's parents are in the village. Not yet escaped. Madhu's elder brother Mithu hides away. Joan boys that they capture and beat. Thinking of all this makes him cry a lot. I remember that cold death night two years ago. Even after the death of the father that night, the mother was still alive. called him Father Mercury, father, father Ray? Oh, how cool that voice was, as if the wind of death had come to her. He fell down on his mother, Mother, Mago. Father, I left you in God's trust. Dad Ray-Mago! No, there was nothing else to say. No one said anything to him. The cable has fallen in bits and pieces. When a tree is shaken, it drops like plums. He screamed like a madman. He ran to the door of his uncle's house. Wanted to say, you see what is happening inside this room. Not told. And he sat helpless in the coldness of death. If you think about it, your chest no longer twists, your body has become stiff. Suddenly it seems that someone is calling.  Bangabandhu, Bangabandhu!  This is me here.

He sat up. There is no one anywhere. He can only hear his chest. Air fills the broken room through the leaky roof. He sat holding his breath. A few rich people in the village have been noticing for a few days; Those who have not escaped from the village are in good contact with the military. Cows, goats, poultry, fish, eggs, milk are being sent to their camp. The soldiers are very excited. Wandering around in food. Takes one as needed. Tied in front of the camp. Or where the one who disappears is no longer found. He sat under the fireplace and shivered. The military is a foreigner. They don't know this village. does not know the language They cannot think of themselves. But why are the people of the country mixed with them? Why are behaving like foreigners? Taking the village people to the camp? Then vultures fly to eat their bodies. His hatred for foreigners and his own people grew. At dawn he came out of the burning house. He can't hear his chest during the day. The night haunts him more. He is very hungry. What to eat?

He started walking through the market. Some are trying to build new shops. Ali made a bamboo bench under a curry tree and started selling tea. Ali told him, I will not build a tea shop without driving away those enemies. You can stay in that burning room as long as you want. Seeing him, Ali called. Mercury, come here. Hungry, brother Ali. No, have tea-biscuits. Won't it? will be too Do I ever eat two biscuits together? Ali says laughing, I know what you eat! Eating sun fills your stomach. Playing jochana fills your heart. Drinking rain water fills your chest, playing air fills your brain, what else do you eat, Budha?

He burst into laughter. By then he had finished eating the biscuit. He sipped his tea cup. Ali saw his face light up with satisfaction. One or two people come and sit. Do not speak loudly. Remains silent, sighs, wet eyes. Some people's eyes are filled with fire. It is not understood how he looks. The boy thinks that no one in this village has ever seen such a sight. People are changing. One day everyone was surprised to hear that there was a peace committee in the village. Ahad Munshi Chairman. The boy understands that the village people are divided into two groups. A group came and sat in Ali's tea shop. They want to talk to each other. The other party is Ahad Munsi's party. Roaming next to the military camp. Suddenly he shouted, 'War, war!' When man is divided into two, the river of war flows through him. From now on his name is War. He felt the excitement within himself. He came to the side of the big road. And while going to the edge of the river, Ahad met Munsi. He raised his hands in a humble manner and said, Slamalekum, Mr. Chairman. Ahad Munshi smiled and patted his head. Seeing the simple face of the boy, he is enchanted. He asks with a smile, what is your name? can't remember My name is War. War? Ahad Munshi's eyes rose to his forehead. What do you say? are you crazy The man standing next to him quickly said, yes, the master is completely crazy. Another said, "Come on, Mr. Chairman, that's a crazy dog." His parents did not die of cholera! All over in one night. Since then his head is not right. Hey, come to my house. I will give the work of grazing cows. I will stay in Peteva. But one thing, Mr. Chairman... What? Say something? I can't pay, Bapu. I have no money in my pocket now. I don't want money from you. I don't touch anyone. What did you say? I said, you are the chairman of the peace committee. But the turmoil across the country. Where is the peace? Shut up! Named Bayaddab? good I am very happy when someone gives me a new name. Saying 'Beyaddab, Beyaddab' and started on the way. Then he started laughing. Her laughter rang in Ahad Munshi's ears. The man frowns as he watches her leave. Forget about going. Mr. Chairman runs. Go! Ahad Munshi says in a different voice. Yes, go. What do you think about the words of a monkey? I don't think so. If so? let's go
Ahad Munshi kept walking. But the rest of the way he doesn't talk to anyone else. While sitting in a tea shop in the afternoon, the boy feels that Ali and Mithu look alike. A strange shadow is playing on the faces of the two. He said to himself, surprise. They are thinking exactly what I am thinking. How can people be one inside? Now is the time to unite. If they cannot be united, these foreign soldiers will kill them and turn them into ghosts. The village will become a crematorium. Where there are no people, there will be ghosts of people. He laughs while thinking. He likes to laugh. Mithu says, why are you laughing, Budha? the ghost Ali and Mithu say together, what is the ghost? If we don't fight, the village will be a ghost house one day. No, I said wrong. No ghosts, the village will be filled with ghosts. They will not be outnumbered. But they will fill the village with their big feet, hands and heads. What are you talking about, Budha? He laughs. keep laughing Ali says, why are you laughing again? You two look alike. What are you not two, one? You are a brave boy. Ali and Mithu started laughing now. Why are you laughing? We understand you. how about There are three of us here if we catch you. But we are not three, but one. right?  yes right The boy said seriously. Mithu asks, do you know what happens when three become one? i know Power increases. is great power. If one, the enemy loses the fight. well done You have to give it. On his way back, the boy brought a bottle of kerosene from Ali. Saying, 'I will pay the price of your oil, Ali brother.' You don't have to pay the price of that oil. Yes, don't pay. We know you took the oil to do something good. Ali supported Mithu.

Both looked at him with deep eyes. He smiled and shook his head. Returning to the burnt house, Budha made a torch by wrapping dry jute around the head of a bamboo stick. Four torches. He went on the road late at night. Ahad quietly moved towards Munsi's house under the cover of trees and bushes. Sitting behind a few bushes and banana trees behind the cowshed, Shishi poured kerosene and soaked the four torches. Then Deshlai lit the fire and threw the big torch on the Atchala house. On a prison. Another in the kitchen. The other is cow. Daudau burns the chhan chala. The fire spread instantly. Sleeping people are busy coming out with life. Nobody cares about saving the house. In a short time the homestead was burnt down. He threw the torch and waited no longer. When everyone is busy running and crying, he hides behind the bushes and runs away. He returned to the burnt house shortly. After hearing the footsteps and whispering, who is there? Jai Bangla He understood Ali's voice. It sounds again, Joy Bangla. It's a sweet voice. Jai Bangla says, he also comes out. They both hugged him. Ali handed a big bottle of kerosene towards him and said, keep this bottle. Use as needed. From now on your new name is Joy Bangla. you are our strength Bengal is our victory. Jai Bangla says we will jump into the war. The boy giggles. The tide of life in his chest. Ups and downs flow. Are you laughing at that? happily Oh dear, I have never been so happy in my life. After my parents-brother-sister died, I didn't know what happiness was! Joy Bangla Khushi whatever you have done is fine. But don't forget that it's time to work. Yes, yes I know, we have a lot of work ahead of us. hard work big job He laughs again. Star flowers bloom in her smile. Ali and Mithu are impressed to see him. We are leaving, Joy Bangla. Ahad Munshi will not leave us. Doubt right. I will escape tonight. you be careful You are young, don't doubt you now. Mithu hugs her. Ali says, we are going to join Mukti Bahini. That military camp must be blown up. I will come on time, Joy Bangla. Don't be afraid. I will be ready for you. I am ready whenever you come. well done Seeing you, I understand that the country will be independent. Seeing you has increased our courage. Now we are not afraid to die. The two disappear into the darkness. He felt that the darkness had drawn them into his bosom. He hid from the eyes of the soldiers. When they left, he couldn't sleep that night. He sleeps on a bamboo loft under a cardamom tree. Seeing a thousand stars in the sky. Today they named her Joy Bangla. An intense joy fills him to such an extent that he forgets all sorrow. He fell asleep.

Early in the morning Ahad Munsi's elder son pulled him by the ear. He looked at Matiur with sleepy eyes. This piglet, get up. Piglets? He opens his eyes properly. where is ali don't know
You know, say? How to know? Who is Ali me? Is he my mother's brother? Yes, showing off. A little devil. Who set fire to our house? Fire! Do not know what fire? As Matiur raised his hand to slap him in rage, he took two steps back and went down the river slope shouting fire fire. After going down a lot, he stopped and looked back. Seeing Matthew standing the same way. He cannot trace his behavior. The boy looked at him and took out his tongue. Then the crow stands dressed. Matiur stood on the bank of the river and scolded him, You have a bad day ahead of you, Budha. I'll chew you up if I get you. A monkey. Remember - people gather at Hambitambi in Motiur. One says, forgive him. Is he okay? Parents are dead. Oh keep parents dead. No one's parents should die. Matthew storms off in a fit of rage. Budha stands still. Bending his neck. Dry leaves fall on the head. No one knows when he will come out of his cocky posture.

The next day, the house of the Rajakar commander of Gaon caught fire. All the houses are burnt. Only human lives are saved, and cows and goats can be saved. The people of the house could not find where and how the fire started. The Rajakar commander beat up the maid and threw her out of the house. He thought that the maid must have left the chalkboards next to the stove after cooking. There was a fire from there. The girl sat under the jum tree outside the house and cried for a long time. Budha gave the girl two jellybeans and said, eat. The girl cried and said, I didn't keep the jute near the stove, Buddha. I don't know how the fire started. Budha sits next to him. Then he gave her the small dab of ointment tucked in her waist and said to apply it on the cut. Ointment? Yes, I brought it for you. I knew you would need this ointment when Razaka's commander was beating you. Put it on and the burning sensation will decrease. Oh, how much war we have to endure. Battle! The girl looked at him in surprise. Where is the war? Is fire fighting? Well, it's like that. I said so. What is your name? flower buds come with me Where? Ata is at her aunt's house. Go there and sleep a little. If I go now they will kill me. won't kill They are now busy with house-doors. Let their mood cool down, then I will come. You have no one. I will go anywhere. income Budha pulls Phulkali's hand. Both of them went on the road avoiding everyone's eyes. The boy says as he goes, are you having a lot of trouble, Phulkali? After applying the ointment, the burning has subsided. How much pain must be endured during war. Why are you repeatedly talking about war? are you fighting yes with whom? with the enemy Enemy! Then you are the fire ... fire! Fire! Fire is all around us. come run Budha grabs Phulkali's hand and pulls it. The girl managed to stumble. Once he stops to catch his breath and says, I understand everything, Budha. I am not your enemy. I know you are not my enemy. We both are one. I will let you know if anything happens in that house. Phulkali I will call you Joy Bangla from now on. Joy Bangla, Joy Bangla. Saying Jai Bangla, Jai Bangla, Phulkali runs again. Now they don't run out of breath. They rushed to Ata Phupur's house. Phulkali whispers, from now on I will call you war, Budha.

Call, but if you get alone. Do not call in front of everyone. ok Phulkali looked at him gratefully. Budha shouted, Fupu, Fupu. i came you did very well Oma florkali that? Didn't your house catch fire? The owner beat him badly, fupu. Do you have panta in the pot, fupu? let us eat That morning, he sat in the kitchen of Ata Fupu and ate panta rice to his heart's content. What joy! After many days, Ata is standing in the courtyard of Fupu and is a crow. When the ball flies past the ear, it seems that a strange sound is coming from inside the ball. The word is different. never heard before Is it the sound of war? He recognized the sound of the rifle. He also knows how to machine gun. The sound that comes out of all these is the sound of war. He did not hear this sound from close. Just then Razakar Quddus stood in front of him.

Are you very happy? Why are you dressed as a crow? He laughs. His cocky expression is no longer correct when he smiles. His body trembled. Why are you laughing? What happened to you? All the people of the village are sad because the commander's house was burnt. And you are laughing? Dhang has been sentenced again Kaktaduwa! Why not smile? Cockatoos also feel like humans. A monkey. Right, like you. I have become like you. What a pleasure, dear. Sail the boat. Quddus jumped away before he could raise his hand to slap her. I'll pick it up if I get it, Satan. Where is the sweet? Look at the bottom of the river. ask me why Am I their guardian? baby pig Say machine gun, my name is machine gun. Haramzada Quddus chases him. He jumped and ran. Kachuripanavara jumped into the pond and went to the other side. Cachuripana sticks to the head. He looks different. He doesn't remove the dust from his head. By the way, if Phulkali was in front of him, he would have laughed. Said, you are a bear. A chubby fat body. Phulkali is very sad. If the country is free, Phulkali will have no more sorrow. The passion to liberate the country awakened in him. The next night, a freedom fighter came to him. Silently called, Joy Bangla. He has no response. sleepless A dream of freedom in his sleep takes him to a wonderland. There he and Phulkali are walking holding hands. Full of flowers and birds. A thousand butterflies fly. He tries to catch it, but cannot catch it. On the other hand Phulkali catches hundreds of butterflies and fills her hair. Flowerpots move around with bright faces. Then once he came to him and said, Buddha, all these butterflies are for you. You won a battle for me. He shouted, I won? Yes, you won. See how the stakes are growing around. See I spread butterflies on your head. He saw that his whole body was covered with butterflies. He was very happy and took a butterfly and started flying in the sky. Phulkali claps. Then he fell asleep. Who is calling him? Bangabandhu? This machine gun? He sat up trembling. Wonder why so much light in the house? Night or day? This battle is up. What the hell did you not wake up? My call does not reach your ears? Wonder, whose voice? Did the speech fly by the ear? He wanted to shout, I am sitting for you. Why didn't you come for so long? Why did it take you so long to reach me? Why are you silent, crow? He crawled out. Freedom fighter Shahabuddin hugged him with both hands. Shahabuddin draws pictures. Studied at art college. Then Shahabuddin is also fighting. Oh war, war. Budha salutes Shahabuddin. Shahabuddin frowned and said, why did you salute? You are the commander of the liberation army. Do not salute? What does that say? OK, OK. I heard you are a brave boy. The boy started laughing. Then took Shahabuddin's hand and sat on the scaffolding. I heard about you from Ali and Mithu. You are fighting alone in this village. War? I? yes Those houses you burnt are also war. Now we have to fight a big battle.
what is that We will blow up the military camp. you stay with us You have to do the work of doing Reiki. What a difficult task, I can do it.

I know you can. Listen to how many sepoys are guarding, how many people are inside the tent, where the machine gun is fitted - I will bring you all the news. I will come again in two days. which fall asleep

How to return? I will cross the river by boat. Don't be afraid. The boy returns to his straw bed. Gutisuti lay down and fell asleep. Before going to sleep, he feels that he has forgotten what fear is. What is new and scary in his life. Now Tak-Duma-Dum drums are playing around his life. His fear is buried under this music. The ghost of fear can no longer seize him; Instead he now finds the happy days of his childhood. All those days when the parents were alive. How many days have you been walking with your father? Bought hilsa fish. mother cooked His siblings used to sit by the hearth smelling the hilsa. In winter, mother used to make steamed pita. What a joyous day it was. In the dream of freedom, he regained the joy of all his days. Now he has no more thoughts. There is no fear of death.

The next day he went to the military camp with a bunch of guavas. They occupied the village schoolhouse and made a camp. Several tents are hung in the front field. He could not see the tent from so far away. But the scene is in his head. That's clear. Crossing the long path that goes straight through the paddy fields on both sides, the schoolhouse is on the right. His school is closed since his parents died. Two years have passed since then. He doesn't want to remember school memories. It is locked in the chest. There is a beautifully designed colorful box inside the chest. He didn't want to open that box in the last two years. Now, as you move towards that school, the chatter in your head is getting intense. How many thousands of times have you walked around the school in two years? Played football in the school field. At night he slept on the school porch, and listened to the sound of the bell ringing in the shop. Surprise! Strong hearing in the head month. Rain all night. He is lying with his head on his right hand looking at the school playground. hard night It won't end. That day he remembered the Day of Judgment. Maulbi Sahib said, on the Day of Resurrection, the sun will come down one hand above the head. Why is he remembering the sun of the doomsday in such a rainy night? What sound does the sun make? Not the sound of rain, but the ringing of bells all around. Thump-thump-thump. When are the school days over? Why does the loud bell pull him? The heavy rains of the month of Shravan started rolling down his eyes. Don't delete it.

Going to school for the first time since the war started. Noon on the head. hot sun He knows that the month of Shravana has come again during this war. no rain His body began to sweat in the hot sun. Guava in shirt pocket. Guava in the waist. stalk And think, what to eat a guava? Thinking comes a long way. The guavas are taken for the men standing with guns in hand and iron caps on their heads. Collecting so many guavas is not just because you will have a chat with them about eating guavas.

He spends his night eating guavas from the trees by the river. He continued to sing and sing. It becomes increasingly fickle. Surprisingly, he did not see the soldiers so closely. His gaze does not waver when he meets their eyes. He understands the lifeless vision. There is nothing to fear. A sightless person who has no language does not feel like a person. Reaches the camp and first bites a guava himself. Another guava advanced towards the first soldier. Pointing to say, eat? The man grinned and grabbed the guava from her hand. Bites and says, very good, very sweet. Aur hai? The boy took out all the guavas and threw them on the ground. Two or four more sepoys came forward from around. The two fell on the guavas. Keep choosing the good ones. Picking up three or four, one asks, what is your name? He smiled and answered, Kakatarua. What arthritis? crow.... The rest can no longer be pronounced. Everyone laughed. One pats his back. He sat down beside them and looked around. Measure every spot in the camp with a quick glance. People are eating guavas with great attention. Their cheeks are sweating in the hot sun. He smiles. Ha-ha started laughing. At that moment, Ahad Munshi, the chairman of the peace committee, stood in front of him. Asking, why are you laughing? Iron hat eats people's brains? What did you say? Ahad Munshi frowned. He said the same thing again. Ahad Munshi's eyes turned red. You were rude to me that day too. I did it today. what is your name  Kakatarua Kakatarua! Tell me right? Crow He laughed as he spoke. Then he started saying in tune, Iron hat eats people, eats people....

Ahad Munshi shouted, Don't be mad. A real badass. Here, make him a crow. Ahad Munsi was accompanied by three Razakars. They have a lot of fun. Hold both hands tightly and say with two or four shakes, and I will kill you if you bully me. You saw the dove, but you didn't see the snare, Moon. They enjoy the festival of making him a crow. He wants to be dragged by the hand to the middle of the field. He jerked his hand away and said, Why are you taking me? I can walk. I don't run away from fear. Yes, big deal. don't say Father-mother-siblings have eaten everything. Khabardar will not talk nonsense. Yes, the Nawab. Nawab is slap me Do not kill. Let people know that I was martyred in the war of independence. What did you say? You have heard what I said. What again? Then someone slapped him on the cheek. He stood up and said, I know how to repay. Again.
Both held his hands. Another man took hold of the leg and swung it. He said, three of you beat one of them is not ashamed? What is shame? I will kill and make ghosts. I will understand then. I quit today. The son was spared because his parents died.

They brought him to the middle of the field and buried him. He didn't move. does not stand up He sleeps in agony. Eyes are heavy. They buried a bamboo in the middle of the field and tied the body with bamboo. And put his right hand on a bamboo. Left hand in the other. He tied his clothes on his head. Then he brought the ink from the bottom of the pot from the kitchen and put it on his face. Chest-back also fills in crooked lines. Then his eyes lit up as the three Razakars walked away laughing. The sepoys could see his glowing eyes in the intense heat of the scorching sun. But they don't understand the language of those eyes. By the way, the boy is having a hard time in the sun. Apart from that, they are very happy after eating the guava given by him a little while ago. They see her new look. They don't think that someone can be punished like this. They know how to shoot, know how to kill with a bayonet. So they enjoy this new style of punishment. Looked at him for a long time. They do not think of waiving his punishment in gratitude for eating guavas. According to the boy, the iron cap ate their brains. In the evening they untied the boy and said, Bhag Hiase.

And do not share. The way they told us to leave, that means we have to run across the field in front of the camp. He can't do that either. He vowed in his heart, here he must come back again. He crossed the field very calmly. It is difficult to walk. The head throbbed. But the pain of the body is not so much, the pearl of happiness swims inside with silver glitter. How many days ago, when he went fishing in the fisherman's boat, he was so happy to see the silver beads. What a surprise, some scenes are never erased. Some scenes create just as much joy or sorrow as others. He understands that tonight a torch will be made in his burnt house. Ahad Munsi's newly built house will burn it. The next morning when the three Rajakas came to look for him, they found him burning and writhing. Mother, mother is shouting. wants to drink water As he is rolling in the straw bed, the straw stick on him. He looks like a terrible creature. Kimbhutakimakar. There is no one beside him. Nedi the dog is lying down under the scaffolding. Silence all around. Afraid of them. They dare not call him. Bhave, if they call him, his ghost will jump on their shoulders. Can kill them. They quickly fled on foot. One says, the boy is not only crazy, today he looks like a ghost. Seeing the inked face made me cringe. you said right I was afraid too. Besides, how does the boy talk. When you hear it, you get chills. I shivered. That ghost has a fever. Then who set fire to the chairman's house? Another Razakar question. There is a sign of fear in his face. The three are overcome with fear. The other said, surely someone from Mukti Bahini will come at night. I understand now. We need to take stronger measures. you said right I think so too. Mukti Bahini will kill us if we are not more careful. Day by day their power is increasing. I think Buddha is also connected with Mukti Bahini. Oh shit, who cares about that boy. Does he know how to shoot a gun? Or learned to open the pin of the grenade? I did not hear how he talked about martyrdom that day. There is no fear of death because there are no parents. crazy I don't think the boy is that crazy.

Got a fever. There is no one around. See if it dies tonight. He became a ghost while he was still alive.
you said right The three of them laughed and walked away quickly. Two days later, late at night, someone called him in a whisper, war and war? Win Bangla? Bangabandhu? He sat up startled. Calling him by this name washes away all his sorrows. The river through which the boat of the freedom fighters moves fast is a river with such a name. The name of the river is Yamuna, Kartoya, or Padma, he does not want to think about that. By the way, what is the harm if the name of the river is Joy Bangla or Bangabandhu? He jumped up and came out. How are you Manikartan? good Shahabuddin brother how are you? Is your fever better? He laughs, it's bear fever. Comes and goes. Do you think so much about fever during the war? No, no need to think. How to fight if not healthy? The body needs strength. Did not say right?  you said You are a painter. You are right. You had a hard time that day, didn't you? Is it difficult for you to fight? no Why would it be difficult? So why should I suffer? well done Tell me what to do now. I heard they will make a bunker. It will be difficult to lose them if they are bunkered in the camp. The camp must be blown up before that. Is this? yes I brought a mine. On the day of building the bunker, you have to work with the excavation team. After the work is done, this mine should be left under the ground anyway. Can you? What a difficult job. I can Be careful! He laughed and rolled over. Are you laughing at that? Why not laugh! He laughs when he hears you. Do you know, being careful is the strategy of liberation war? i know Well tell me why they will bunker? They realized that we could attack by coming to the river. It is such a precautionary measure. He laughed again. Holding nails in his stomach while laughing. Shahabuddin is scared by the sound of her laughter. It seems that the boy is more daring. Shahabuddin then decided that he would paint a picture of the boy when the country became independent. No, not one, but many. Picture of the boy fighting in various poses.

War, don't laugh like that. You don't make me laugh. I'll laugh alone when you're gone. No, don't laugh alone. You sit in front of me and smile. I will draw a picture of you. Photo of brave boy. You don't stay here much longer, Shahabuddin Bhai. Listen, I'll have the boat ready tomorrow evening. When the camp explodes like a howitzer, we will retreat to the river. The boy laughed again. Laughing says, great fun game. Let's go, win Bengal. come on be careful See you again. Shahabuddin disappears into the darkness. The boy sits on the couch with his hands on his cheeks. The rest of the night he does not sleep.

The next day he sits on the way to the camp. When will the cutting team come? And wanders. catch the grasshopper Chews young stalks of grass. Drinks water from the sink. But that day, the team to cut the soil did not come. After noon, when the sun went down, he appeared at Mithu's house on his feet. Sitting on the balcony of the kitchen and saying, Aunt, I am hungry. I haven't eaten all day. I will come and eat rice every day. why don't you come Seeing you sitting in front of me and eating rice eases my pain. The empty space in the chest is filled. It seems that the country has become independent. He smiles softly. Mithu's mother gives him Sankivara rice. Tangra fish curry with eggplant. Oh what fun, what joy! He eats happus-hupus. Mithu's mother sees the twinkle of starlight in his eyes. Says, Channchacha, my honey was killed by Pakistanis. Mithu also left home. The girl lives in her in-laws' house. If I get you, I will forget my sorrow. From now on I will call you honey, how? He remained silent for a while and said, not only honey, martyred honey. Martyr honey? O my honey re... Mithu's mother starts crying. It's not just a cry, it's a loud scream. Those whose sons are martyred only burst out of their chests. No other voice can make such a sound. He no longer eats rice. He comes up with the plate. He came to the back of the house and sprinkled the rice. Crows fly.

He began to pick up the grains of rice in his lips. He said to himself, what a beautiful scene! Kakera eats rice and fills the breasts of Shahid's mothers. Bargi flees the country. The mothers of the martyrs started flying with the wings of crows to deliver the news of freedom to the streets. He says again, what a beautiful scene. When she sits on the bank of the pond and washes the sunkita, she realizes that the aunt has stopped crying and the aunt is wiping her eyes with a sari.

After coming back from Pukurghat, he slowly said, "Let's go aunty." When will you come again? don't know a lot of work You can come and eat the rice every day. a lot of work ok He muttered and tilted his head. Mithu's mother knows that he will not come. His chest became heavy. Screaming and crying. As if Madhu was killed by military brushfire some time ago. The bullet-riddled body was brought in front of his mother. Mothers are like that. Crying out his chest. He forgets to call the bird sitting on the tree branch in tears. The grasshopper is stunned. The light goes out. No one can bear the tears of mothers. His eyes watered at the thought. On the way he met Kusti. He is going home with a bunch of bees. Seeing Budha, his eyes sparkled. Says, how many days you don't come to our house, Budha Bhai. I don't have time. a lot of work What is so much work? Don't you want to see me? I really want to see you. How many days I went to the market, but I did not see you. I have a lot of work, Kunti. Kunti says in a strong voice, I know your lot of work. I will also fight with you.  Will you fight? What if not? I will do it. You just tell me what to do. Let's see the parents' grave.

come on You don't know that I clean the graves of uncles and aunts. clear the grass Remove the dry leaves. I planted a tree at the head of each grave. You do so much, Kunti?
I do why do you You will be happy for that. Kunti! Kunti's eyes twinkled. Budha held her hand. Then holding his hand he came to the grave of his parents. Kunti can see Akanda, Bhatful, Dhutra-these plants are planted on the head of the grave. The graves look so beautiful. He sat in front of his mother's grave and said, "Mother, pray for me." Your son has a lot of work to do. There is a lot of work ahead. If I can't talk to you anymore - Kunti raises her voice, what are you talking about, Budha Bhai. Where will you go? I won't go, I can go. Where? in the sky Why in the sky? If those soldiers kill me. If they shoot my chest open.

oh god... Kunti screams and starts crying. don't cry stop I know that I have no one but you. It hurts me a lot when you cry. Kunti stops crying and says in surprise, it's ashes. Budha slapped him on the head and stood in front of his father's grave again. Says, may your son get back his happy days, father. As if the country can be freed by war. Father, pray for me not to lose courage. Budha suddenly burst into tears. Kunti is surprised. Never seen him cry. What happened today? When Budha stopped crying, Kunti warmed her eyes and said, are you afraid to fight? Why are you crying? Budha is shy and silent. Kunti says fiercely, one cannot fight if one thinks of death. If you fight, you will die.

Kunti! You are a very good girl. Do you know why I brought up this prayer? To avoid hunger. Do not die of hunger. Besides war there is death. The boy was surprised. What happened to Kunti today? Kunti grew up as if she had taken refuge. A magic game that grows up overnight.  go home If you give them to mother, mother will cook them. That's not all we have to eat. You haven't come to our house for a long time. come today yes go Let's see aunt. He started walking holding the wrestling hand. The next day he saw a group of earth-cutters heading towards the camp with baskets and spades. He ran and stood in front of them. Uncle Faju, I will cut the ground with you. can i That's the body. Do you have balls? which, share. What to eat if not work? I don't get hungry? Do I have anyone? He burst into tears. The cry makes such a sound that the others stop. Done, done, no need to cry. Everyone consoles him. Come with us. If you are in the team, Ahad Munshi will not be able to deny you. He joins the group. Wrapped in a towel and tied mine to the waist. Loose clothes. It is not understood that there is anything inside. Bunker cutting has started. Everyone is busy. The mud is coming up in the spade. Ahad Munsi's son Mathew is supervising the work. People have been made restless by threats. Faju scolds Mia for taking Budha on the team. But after a while I was happy to see his interest in work. The Mativas ran and took the basket and threw it towards the east. After pouring the soil, Faju stood in front of Mia again with an empty basket. Matiur can't help but admire his quick manner of work. I think, the parents died and the boy was left alone. Otherwise something could have happened. After seeing the progress of the work till noon, he happily goes home to eat rice.

By afternoon, the bunker was finished. everyone is happy Can return home before evening. Faju Mia washes her face and hands and wipes them with a towel, which has fallen during the day, thinking about what can be left outside the house after evening. A bullet will burst through the chest. These piglets kill people like birds. At that moment, the boy said to Fazu Mia, uncle, I come to see the inside once? Bunker Keman will not be seen again in this life. Let's go. Come inside and see. But be careful, we will return home before evening. Who wants to hear about Faju returning home from Mia, her feet are fast. In a moment he entered the bunker and removed the raw earth with his hands and buried the mine. Then comes up to whistle. Faju Mia asks, what the hell, how did it happen? great Once you enter, you don't want to get up. Look, the sepoys won't want to get out of it. Faju Mia smiles and pats him on the back and says, crazy. The boy rolled his eyes and said, at night, they would lie in the bunker and watch Hawibaji. Oh, I wish I could live in this bunker. Faju Mia pulls her aside and whispers, May God forgive her. May we not be lucky to stay here. This is their grave.  He saluted Faju Mia's feet and ran away. Fazu Mia does not understand why he saluted, why he is running. Understand, time will come. He must return home.

The boy came running to the river. The evening is dark. He reached Shahabuddin who was hiding by the bush. Shahabuddin hugged him, I was almost dying of worry for you, liberation war. I buried it. No mistake was made. Now I will sit to listen to the word.
Well done boy. No, take a bite. Both eat jaggery together. After filling the stomach, Anjlavra quenches thirst with water from the river. Shahabuddin says, what happens if you simplify the bunker, tell me? Bakar. And a little smaller? barker And a little smaller curve. Now bring the middle letter forward. the grave He excitedly says, Bakar, Bakar; grave, grave Shahabuddin Bhai their grave. At that moment, when some sepoys entered the bunker to take position, the mine exploded under foot pressure. A loud noise echoed through the village, along with screams. Shahabuddin took the boy's hand and jumped into the boat. The boat ran towards the opposite side of the camp. Skilled sailors go far in one pull. The darkness of the evening is all around. Stars in the sky.

The boy lay down on the floor of the boat with his legs spread. The two hands are extended to both sides. Shahabuddin did not notice when the cloth was taken off and tied on his head. Just like the crow is lying down. When Shahabuddin realized that they had crossed the danger line, he wanted to sing very much. In the heart of the melody. Before opening his throat to sing, he looked at the boy and was stunned. Don't blink. All around fields, houses, rice paddies, rivers, sky trees, the boy is a wonderful hero crow. Stopping the enemy's movement. The liberation war is kept in the chest.